We have three ways to hold sand together. The obvious question:
if we combine them, do the strengths just add up?
A sticky bio-polymer, cement grown from carbon dioxide, and a
seaweed gel. Each adds its own cohesion to the crust.
Naively you would just stack them. But
three real effects bend that answer.
First, competition. All three fight over the same calcium — and the
cement is the greediest sink, so it starves the polymers a little.
Second, burden. When one cell makes two products at once, they
share one energy budget, so each yields a bit less.
Third, synergy. Some pairs help each other — the polymer's acidic groups
template better crystals — so a bonus term is added back.
Add the cooperation, subtract the competition, and the combined
crust still comes out tougher than any single prong.
And there is a safety bonus: if a storm
defeats one mechanism, the others still hold. Redundancy is
why the team survives conditions that break any soloist.